---
title: "Discovery"
---

Team 3: Cody Lundell, Christina Worden, Dan Gabiou

Topic Overview of Chapter 8: Discovery
	This set of readings includes Chapter 2 of Social Physics: How Social Networks Can Make us Smarter, Chapter 8 of Reality Mining: Using Big Data to Engineer a Better World, and several discovery-related blog posts from the I Quant NY website.
In Chapter 2: Exploration of Social Physics…, Pentland (2015) states that “the most consistently creative and insightful people are explorers” (p. 26). By explorers, the author means that good ideas come from collaborating to obtain different perspectives, enhancing the idea, and repeating until confidence is built. Or in other words, “exploration is the part of the idea flow that brings new ideas into a work group or community (Petland, 2015, p. 39). This concept could also be applied to gaining insight from big data and social networks, where “copying successful people, yields real rewards” (Pentland, 2015, p. 33). To ensure exploratory success (positive results from your collaboration efforts), Petland (2015) recommends: 1) diversity, 2) social learning (copying successful people/ideas), and 3) seeking out contrarian consensus (learning why groups of people are opposed to an idea) (p. 39-41).
	In Chapter 8 of Reality Mining: Using Big Data to Engineer a Better World, Eagle and Greene (2014) show examples of how data visualization (such as timelines, maps, and graphs) may be used to help predict, prioritize, prepare for, and address social, environmental, political, and economic issues. Data visualization goes beyond gathering data and identifying trends, it’s compiling such data into comprehensive visual aids to help policy makers and the public understand the direness of the situation to help in decision-making. 
The take-away from the I Quant NY blogs is the importance of having and sharing data with the public. The blog authors were able to use available data to review government practices and openly identify inefficient use of tax payer funds. By posting data online, the public has more access to validate government work, discover issues, and potentially enable corrective action or create added value.
	In summary, our Discovery readings suggest that big data can serve many purposes and help improve our world in many ways. Step one is collecting, publicly sharing, and validating such data. Since we have data overload, it’s important to explore, collaborate, and challenge data to ensure accuracy of both the data itself and what it’s telling us. Lastly, data must be transformed in to easy-to-understand visualizations in order for such data to tell the full story and inspire action. Only then can we maximize the use of such data and more efficiently and effectively implement solutions.

I Quant NY Blog Post Discoveries Summary
  In the first blog post, Data Shows No Increase In NYC Plowing as Storm Picked Up, the author felt that inefficient snow plow operations were causing tremendous traffic problems, particularly during the evening rush hour. The author obtained raw snow plow/street centerline directly from New York City, depicted such data in GIS maps, and ultimately discovering that the city had not properly planned for a recent 5”-snow event, resulting in hour and a half delays on average, with some areas not being plowed at all.
  In the second blog, entitled Open Data Reveals $791 Million Error in Newly Adopted NYC Budget, the author feels that the top line item in the NYPD’s FY2017 budget table ($791M for Protection of Foreign Missions) was in error. After doing a little exploration by reading the articles the author provides to support this claim and comparing NYCPD’s budget to Phoenix PD’s budget, I’m not sold that this claim is valid. To compare, Phoenix PD has had a $600M-$688M total operating budget for the past three fiscal years (https://www.phoenix.gov/budgetsite/budget-books/Summary-Budget-2018-19.PDF). The author compared the $791M figure to a $27M figure from a 2012 police financial statement, but that figure appears to be for a different program. Although it is questionable that this is actually a $791M error, transparency of data did help the author identify the need for NYCPD to give a more transparent and consistent naming convention for their Staff Salaries budget line item.
  The final blog I read was Payer or Prayer – A Look at NYC’s $650M Property Tax Breaks Related to Religion. The blog author noted that in 2015, property taxes made up for 27% of the city’s $70B budget, yet it was very challenging to obtain property tax data from the city. After public citizens created an index from the city’s online property tax PDFs, it was realized that property tax exemptions totaled $12.9B, with Houses of Worship contributing $476M, which ipso facto is being paid by non-exempt property tax payers (Payer or Prayer… 2016, https://iquantny.tumblr.com/). 
  Whether discovery claims are valid or not, the take-away from these blogs is the importance of having and sharing data with the public. At the end of the day, most government agencies attempt to be transparent by complying with Open Meeting laws and posting meeting minutes, but many committees are not well-attended and most overseeing boards are not technically savvy, relying on government data to be accurate. By posting data online, the public has more access to validate government work, discover issues, and potentially enable corrective action.



## References

* Pentland, A. (2015). Social Physics: How social networks can make us smarter. Penguin. **CH2 exploration**
* Eagle, N., & Greene, K. (2014). Reality mining: Using big data to engineer a better world. MIT Press. **CH8 economic deficits and disasters**
* Select three blog posts from [I Quant NY](http://iquantny.tumblr.com/) and **describe some discoveries that have come from open data in NYC**

